Once selected, the filters discussed thus far are applied to an image without regard
for how image characteristics vary from one point to another. In this section, we
take a look at two adaptive filters whose behavior changes based on statistical char-
acteristics of the image inside the filter region defined by the m × n rectangular
neighborhood Sxy . As the following discussion shows, adaptive filters are capable
of performance superior to that of the filters discussed thus far. The price paid for
improved filtering power is an increase in filter complexity. Keep in mind that we
still are dealing with the case in which the degraded image is equal to the original
image plus noise. No other types of degradations are being considered yet.


Adaptive, Local Noise Reduction Filter
The simplest statistical measures of a random variable are its mean and variance.
These are reasonable parameters on which to base an adaptive filter because they
are quantities closely related to the appearance of an image. 

THE MEAN GIVES A MEA- SURE OF AVERAGE INTENSITY IN THE REGION OVER WHICH THE MEAN IS COMPUTED, AND THE
VARIANCE GIVES A MEASURE OF IMAGE CONTRAST IN THAT REGION.

Our filter is to operate on a neighborhood, Sxy , centered on coordinates (x, y).
The response of the ﬁlter at (x, y) is to be based on the following quantities: g(x, y),
the value of the noisy image at (x, y); z_Sxy is the local average intensity of the pixels in neighbourhood Sxy ;
and variance Sxy, the local variance of the intensities of
pixels in Sxy . We want the behavior of the ﬁlter to be as follows:

1. If variance is zero, the ﬁlter should return simply the value of g at (x, y). This is the
trivial, zero-noise case in which g is equal to f at (x, y).

2. If the local variance is high relative to the noise variance, the filter should return a value
close to g at ( x, y). A high local variance typically is associated with edges, and
these should be preserved.

3. If the two variances are equal, we want the ﬁlter to return the arithmetic mean
value of the pixels in Sxy . This condition occurs when the local area has the same
properties as the overall image, and local noise is to be reduced by averaging.

An adaptive expression for obtaining fˆ ( x, y) based on these assumptions may be
written as:

estimated f(x, y) = g(x,y) − variance_noise / variance_Sxy * [g(x,y) − z_Sxy]

The only quantity that needs to be known a priori is sh2 , the variance of the noise
corrupting image f(x, y). This is a constant that can be estimated from sample noisy
images using equation from histogram processing.

An assumption in Equation above  is that the ratio of the two variances does not exceed 1,
which implies that noise variance ≤ variance Sxy . The noise in our model is additive and position indepen-
dent, so this is a reasonable assumption to make because Sxy is a subset of g(x, y).
However, we seldom have exact knowledge of noise variance. 

Therefore, it is possible for this condition to be violated in practice. For that reason, a test should be built into an
implementation of Equation above so that the ratio is set to 1 if the condition noise variance > variance Sxy
occurs. This makes this filter nonlinear.

However, it prevents nonsensical results (i.e., negative intensity levels, depending on the value of z_Sxy )
due to a potential lack of knowledge about the variance of the image noise. Another approach is to allow the
negative values to occur, and then rescale the intensity values at the end. The result then would be a loss of dynamic range in the image.


Figure 5.14(c) shows the result of using the adaptive median ﬁlter with Smax = 7. Noise removal
performance was similar to the median ﬁlter. However, the adaptive ﬁlter did a much better job of pre-
serving sharpness and detail. The connector ﬁngers are less distorted, and some other features that were
either obscured or distorted beyond recognition by the median ﬁlter appear sharper and better deﬁned
in Fig. 5.14(c). Two notable examples are the feed-through small white holes throughout the board, and
the dark component with eight legs in the bottom, left quadrant of the image.
Considering the high level of noise in Fig. 5.14(a), the adaptive algorithm performed quite well. The
choice of maximum allowed size for Sxy depends on the application, but a reasonable starting value can
be estimated by experimenting with various sizes of the standard median ﬁlter ﬁrst. This will establish a
visual baseline regarding expectations on the performance of the adaptive algorithm.
